on the campus as a youngster, for you and your
friends, did it matter what the job status of your
parents was when you were at A&M-Solidarity? I
doubt if most of us even knew what our parents did or
what the parents of our friends did. We knew they
were teachers, connected with the college, being
paid with the college, but no, it didn't make any
difference. And I'm assuming that there was
comparative continuity in those friendships
because there was a comparatively stable...
Right, right. I mean, they'd come here. I mean, so
many came here, and from whatever point they were
at, when they came, they proceeded until they
generally either graduated from A&M or went off
someplace else. All right, now you enrolled at A&M
as a freshman in the fall of? In the summer of 1944. I
graduated from high school on Friday night and
enrolled at A&M on Monday. That was when we were on
the trimester during the war. Okay, all right.
And, oh, well, let's back up a little bit. How did,
describe the changes that you recall at A&M after
Pearl Harbor? Well, let's see.
First thing, after Pearl Harbor, the whole class
of 1942, I believe it was, 41 or 42,
left en masse and went, I think, I may not be exactly
right, but it seemed to me like they went to San
Antonio as a group and were inducted and then came
back and finished the year and then went in the
service. I believe, I don't think that's correct.
And from then on until the war was over the student
body just became fewer in number and more and more
military units were taking their place. When I
entered A&M in 1944, there were less than 2,000
students in A&M. There were probably 6,000 or
8,000
people on campus, but the rest of them were Navy or
Marine or Army. Was it V12 or something? Where did
they live? They lived in the core area. It was not a
core area. And the A&M students lived in the old
arms. Over on the north side? On the north side.
Back to Pearl Harbor for a second. Do you remember
hearing that news? I was at the campus theater on
Sunday afternoon. They stopped the movie and said
that the Japanese had bombed Pearl Harbor. Of
course, most of us didn't have a clue. I was only
about 15 years old at the time. And the one thing I
remember my folks said, my mother said, well,
she's glad that I was not old enough to have to go in
this service. At the time, I got to be 18.
I was playing football that fall. My birthday's in
October. And
we played out the season. We played University of
Texas on Thanksgiving. And then on Monday, we got
on the train and drove the train down to Miami and
played University of Miami. And when I got back
from that trip, my dad handed me my draft notice.
And he had come before Thanksgiving, but he got it
in the mail and held it until the season was over.
And I guess if he had come before Thanksgiving, it
didn't take about a month or six weeks at the most
from the time I turned 18. until the time I was
drafted. And nearly everybody's in the same boat.
As soon as you turned 18, you were gone. All right,
were you deferred? No, I wasn't deferred. The
university or the college said that if you're
drafted, Any courses that you were passing at the
time, you got credit for them without finishing
the semester. So then you go on active duty when?
Well, I went on active duty in January of 1945. All
right, so let's go back. So you're here from the
summer of? Summer of 1944 through January of 1945.
The football team that fall that you were with,
were most of them freshmen and sophomores? Really
a large majority were freshmen. There were a few
sophomores. The year before was the Kiddie Corps
team that was nearly all 17 year olds. And we had two
or three guys, Bullet Gray that I mentioned, and
Bob Buchovsky, and Monty Mongrief, that were
veterinary students. And they had gotten
deferred? They were deferred in order to finish
veterinary school. And we had three or four, I
can't remember, at least three. And then we had two
or three guys that did discharge for one reason or
another and came back. And
then there were some that had played the year
before that evidently were so young that they were
able to make it through their sophomore year. But
nearly all of us, nearly all of us, before the war
was over, we called into service. I'm not going to
ask you who, if there is an answer to this question.
Did you know of any person, were you acquainted
with anybody, who attempted to evade?
That's my memory, too. I don't know of anybody. I'm
sure there were some, but those guys that were in
vet school, veterinary medicine school, I don't
think they were evaded. in vet school because most
of them were seniors. And they would have had to
anticipate.
Where did you live that summer and fall? I lived at
home. Oh, you lived at home. And you took full load
academically. What was your major? It was
undeclared at the time.
I guess pretty much all took the same thing. Nearly
all of my classes,
the role was alphabetical. A's through C's were in
there. I was with that group nearly all the way.
Aren't you in your reported active duty when?
January. and you left by the train on bus bus we were
reported to the draft office in dubai and we got on
the bus we went to houston we were inducted in
houston the coach on the train and sent us to san
antonio one interested that was one of the guys
that i met the morning that we reported for the
draft was a a guy that had graduated from Bryan High
School. His name's Ray Copas. I don't know if you
know Ray or not, but anyway, we rode the bus
together down to Houston. They shipped us to
Fort Hood, Camp Hood. We were in the same platoon.
In fact, in the same squad. My name's Cash, and his
name was Copas, and we were close enough We were in
the same squad in basic training. When the war in
Europe was over, they said that 18-year-olds had
to be in the service six months. And so they sent us
down to Camp
Rucker, Alabama. And we stayed down there until
August of 1945. And they shipped us to Fort Ord. And
we were on the ship two days out of Fort Ord when they
dropped the atom bomb. How did you hear about that?
I don't know. They just started talking about it.
Because the war was over by the time we got
overseas. How did you guys react when you heard the
war was over? Well, you know, there wasn't much we
could do except just holler and hoot. But Ray and I,
Staying together, they shipped us to the
Philippines, and from the Philippines to Korea.
We were in Korea a year, and they shipped us home.
And we rode the bus from San Antonio to Dubai to get
to America. So we were roommates the whole time we
were in Korea. Ray, after we both went back in the
Corps, when we got back in there and got our
commissions, when the Korean War started about 10
days after I graduated. But we were already
committed to two years. But he transferred his
commission to the Air Force and made a career. I got
out quick as I could. His last duty station was A&M.
and
he retired here and we played golf together three
days a week. Back before you leave, the first time,
do you remember anything said by your parents the
night before or as you go to the bus or anything? I
remember
my parents were strangely
quiet. They didn't say much. I remember the
morning that we got up early, they had to be over
there at 6 o'clock or something.
But it was a whole lot more traumatic for them than
it was for me, I'm sure. I didn't much care. Let's
see, other things. Do you remember where you were
when you heard that President Roosevelt had died?
No.
Let's see. That was in, what, April of 45? Mm-hmm. I
was in Fort Wood. I was in basic training in Fort
Wood. I don't remember my reaction much. I was in
the shower, spring training in high school. Oh,
really? And we thought some guy was trying to play a
joke. And we said, hey, that's not funny. And he
said, no, it's the truth. When I got home, I
realized I hadn't even dried off. I put my clothes
on, wet. And all the way home, we were talking
about, wonder who the president will be, because
President Roosevelt had been the only president
we could remember. Yeah. But I don't remember much
reaction.
I do remember
we were on our way from Camp Rucker to Fort Howard on
the train when we heard that they had stopped gas
racing. And I remember that because all during the
time we were in high school. We got four gallons of
gas a week, and we couldn't do much, you know, four
gallons. All right, so you get back to A&M in the
fall of 46? 46, yeah. Describe A&M then. Then it was
bustling, man. And the strange thing was to see so
many people not in uniform. Because, you know, to
me, you're an Aggie, you wore a uniform. And when we
got back, why, most of the guys were not in the
Corps. There were more veterans here than there
were non-veterans. And there was a distinct gap
between the veterans and non-veterans.
Age-wise, motivation-wise,
a lot of them were married. It was just, I mean, it
was Two camps all together. All right. Now, did you
go back into the Corps? Yeah, I went back into the
Corps. I went one semester. Taylor Wilkins was the
veterans advisor. And he got to be good buddies
with a whole bunch of us college kids and bride
kids. I'm not sure exactly why or who started it. I
think Ellie Wynder won it. But anyway, Taylor
Whitman had a big influence on us, and he taught
several of us. He just said, you're going to be
sorry if you get your permission. So we got back in
the Corps, and because of the extra hours that we
had to take in order to finish our military, it cost
me extra semesters. So instead of graduating in
January of 1950,
I graduated
in June. So you go back in the Corps as a sophomore?
Well, no, I went back and we got credit for the first
two years. Oh, first two years, okay. Because we
were in the service. So I went back in. under
contract okay uh and did where did you live then
about here so you lived at home all four years right
uh about uh where were where was this big crowd of
students living well of course the the dorms were
all full and then they built they built was the
college view you know you know the they moved the
barracks and built for the marriage students. And
then the all the project houses have been
converted to marriage student quarters. Were
there some house trailers also? Oh yeah, I was just
in addition to the project houses, the whole area
that's now the parking lot for the stadium and for
the tennis courts, it was all But it was all on the
east side of the Weldron Road.
There were a few houses right immediately beyond
the Weldron Road. They had been there. People that
worked on the A&M Farms and so on lived in them. And
I'm not sure. There may have been some students
living in some of those. But they lived just about
everywhere. I don't know where they could find
that place. All right. Describe, compare the
attitude you had as a student when you came back
with the attitude you had when you first began.
Well, when I first began, I mean, the uppermost
thing in my mind was . Except my dad, I mean, He said,
if you don't make your grades, you can't play. And
he was paying the bill at that point. I remember
Coach Norton asked me if I was going to play
football that summer. And I said, no, I didn't
think I was. And he wondered why. And I said, well, I
didn't think I was big enough. He said, well,
you've got a uniform that'll fit you. It's not for
you to come out. That's what I wanted to do, you
know. And so I went out for football, and there were
about 100 of us or so that went out for football. And
it was just like high school. Anybody wanted to
play. And there were a few guys on scholarship. So
in today's terminology, that first fall, you were
a walk-on back in 44. I walked on. And I remember
that they, I'm sure the guys that were on
scholarship, I didn't know what a scholarship
was. I never even heard of a scholarship. But the
ones that were on scholarship, they practiced.
When we first started that summer, they were
practicing on the practice field that was right by
the stadium. I was way over at the baseball
field. And I don't even remember who was coaching
us, because they only had three or four coaches.
And I don't know who was even coaching us, but I kept
getting moved up, moved up. And finally, by the
time the first game came around, I was starting. So
you, as a walk-on, were a starter. First game. And
you weighed about how much? 150. What was your
position? Quarterback. Quarterback. And you all
were running the? We were running the T formation.
The first time we started everybody. I think he
just played. He was just having an enjoyable time
trying something new. In the lingo of that day, it
was the tight tee, not the splint. Then when you
come back... When we came back... Back to this
attitude.
Well, I still want to play football, and that
didn't change until... We played LSU. My
sophomore year, I broke my leg. And after that,
football wasn't near as important. All I could
think about was getting out. And I wanted to coach.
And I just wanted to get through the school and get
going. Well, then when I got through the school,
the war started and they called me back in the
service. And so I went back in the service. when I
got back out two years later and back and that
Taylor Wilkins gave me a job as a military
counselor said I could work on my master's degree
as soon as I got it well I went to West Texas and
started coaching. And that you began coaching
what year?
all right uh let's go back to the when you come back
in 46. uh you had to declare a major somewhere along
the way what well i physical education because i
definitely i wanted to coach that's what i want to
do as you now look back on all of those
undergraduate years who were the key teachers or
advisors or counselors that made a difference
there was uh There was a biology prof. Let
me see what his name was. I didn't think I'd ever
forget his name. Anyway, he taught anatomy and
physiology. And most of us that were in the class
were PE majors.
But he did the best job teaching. I'm just getting
material across to him. And he was so patient with
us, you know. And I just, I thought he was one of the
best professors I ever had. Dr. Keel was an English
teacher,
I believe. And I thought a lot of him. What was the
history teacher that went to East Texas? Ralph
Steen. Ralph Steen. I thought he was marvelous.
What made him so good? He was just entertaining.
I had his class Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday at 8
o'clock. And I never missed it. Because I just
enjoyed learning it. He made Texas history
something beside dates. I'm surprised to hear you
say that about him.
He'd come in in the morning and all he'd have was his
grade book. And he'd check the roll and then he'd
start talking and he'd refer to a passage that he
had assigned or something.
Let's see. Another teacher that made a... impact
on me, but it was negative, was
Square Root Jackson. Did you ever have Square
Root? No, but I heard the legend that he was hard,
hard to pass. Well, he did so many, he was such a
mathematician, I suppose, that he never could get
on the especially at first year algebra. I was
taking trig under him. And up until that point, I'd
never made anything but an A in math. And I remember
we got, I was just barely hanging on by the skin of my
teeth when we left to go to Miami at Thanksgiving.
And he would come in and he would say, okay open your
book to sudden sets we're gonna work these
problems and he'd like that i mean he had the book
memorized he didn't even look at the book he'd
write the problems on the board and he'd work them
so fast and he was with no explanation and i was i was
really i was really thinking about being a math
teacher until that one semester with him
He just destroyed my confidence as far as math's
concerned. I still would like to be a math teacher.
If I had to do over, that's what I'd teach.
I wish I could think of that man's name, though,
because he taught biology here for a long time. Any
non-instructional counselors, advisors? Well,
we always thought a lot of Spike White. What did
Spike do? Spike was... Well, at one point he ran a
mural program. And then he was director of student
services or something. I'm not sure what it was. He
was just a friend. Kind of like Mr. Penny Pembroke.
There were so many of those guys that were here
before I left. that were my dad's peers. And
because of that relationship, I had a special
relationship with Dr. Gammon and Mr. Penberthy
and Dean Bolton and Gib Gilchrist. They were
family friends as well as professional friends.
And you couldn't keep from being influenced by
those people. And I'm assuming also that was a
pretty good restraint on any kind of... There was
no thought of, you know, of trying to get by with
something. Of mischief. Because you weren't
going to. I mean, it was just... You know, I've
often thought that maybe I'd have been a whole lot
better off down the line if I'd gone off someplace
else. And, you know, you never know. You can't
second guess, but... Now you, when you came back
after the war, were you on scholarship and the GI
Bill? I was on scholarship and the GI Bill and a
military contract. Okay. Oh, you had some money
then. I had more money, more money to spend my last
two years in Indiana than I've ever had since. Did
you live at home? I lived at home and my scholarship
was a check for $60 a month. OK. Now I'm thinking
about the parental changes. How did your mother
and dad differ, if they did, in the advice and
counsel they gave you after the war before? Well,
they pretty much left me alone, as far as They
didn't look down my throat or anything like that.
But I knew that they were there. And I wasn't going
to do anything that would discredit them. You had a
car. Well, I did the last year. The last year. You
couldn't buy a car. Oh, that's right. Sure. You
couldn't buy a car. So I got my name on the list. And
just before my senior year,
My
aunt that lived across the street had, she had her
name on the list up at Will's Point all during the
war. Well, her name came up and she said, well, you
can buy that parking lot. I had saved enough money
from- What kind of car was it? 1948 Chevrolet, two
door. How long did you keep it? I kept it until 1950.
I swapped it for a Buick. Remember what you paid for
it? I paid $1,400. Wow. Cash. Yeah. Now, after you
hurt your leg, did you play? I hurt my leg, I think it
was the fourth game my sophomore year. So I had to
finish layout that year. And then I
had gained so much weight. I never was the fastest
guy in the world. And so after I came back, I never
couldn't run much. And I played two more years. But
it was just kind of off and on. And my attitude
wasn't as good as it should have been as far as it
wasn't the same. I'll put it that way. And I got
caught up like everybody else that was in my
situation. There was a the coaching staff was
trying to recruit the young guys and they brought
them in. We had Glenn Lipman and that bunch that
were freshmen, my junior year. And there was, if
they treated everybody like veterans, the
freshmen weren't getting what they needed. And if
they treated us like incoming freshmen, there was
just a big gap between them. And so, It was really a
trying time as far as athletics is concerned.
Coach Norton is here through your... Sophomore
year. Sophomore year. I played for... Steitler?
Steitler. Describe Coach Norton as a coach, as a
person. Well, Coach Norton was my eye as far as
coaching was concerned, you know. And he and
Manning Smith, Manning Smith was the backfield
coach. And from the time I began to move up far
enough where there was a chance that I might get the
play, I spent an hour or so every day at this coach's
office with the other guys that were going to be
quarterbacks.